jamstack intro (#124)
xmartlabs/blog: _posts/2020-06-10-jamstack.md

## Why the JAMstack?

Because JAMstack delivers better performance, higher security, lower cost of scaling, and a better developer experience compared with the well know monolithic web architecture.

**Better Performance**  
When it comes to minimizing the time to first byte, nothing beats pre-built files served over a CDN.
The JAMstack is faster because the browser processes functionality that the back-end traditionally executed (e.g. rendering documents on the fly on a server).

**Higher Security**  
With server-side processes abstracted into microservice APIs and the lack of a monolithic server, surface areas for attacks are reduced. JAMSTACK also leverages the security domain expertise of specialist third-party services.

> **Cheaper, Easier Scaling**  

Author: I would prefer to remove the dot, it's like a title or secondary section

LAMP and MEAN stacks are examples of this stack.

**Modern web stack**

In contrast to the monolithic web approach, there is no single origin of content, there is no single point of failure. We can also say that the loading time from any part of the world is pretty much the same since the front-end static code is distributed all over the world through the CDN.

<img src="/images/jamstack-intro/JAMStack-diagram.jpg" />

> The git centric workflow allows us to host the entire website in its git repository and also allows us to pre-build and deploy the front-end static code whenever something is merged into the production branch.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The git centric workflow allows us to host the entire website in its own git repository, also allowing us to pre-build and deploy the front-end static code whenever something is merged into the production branch.
```

As the diagram shows, the app relies on several microservices to perform server-side functionalities like sending emails, performing a payment flow and so on. Microservices typically solve a specific problem and are highly composable.

## What caused JAMStack rapidly adoption

> In the last years, front-end development has turned out drastically. Modern browsers, static site generators (SSG), expansive Content Delivery Networks, and the API microservices economy caused the JAMstack’s emergence.

Reviewer: I don't understand what "turned out drastically" means and I'm not being able to find it via google. Is it that it has become too complex or that the paradigm has shifted (changed)?

### Git growth

> Git started to be more popular not only for version control but also it started to become the way developers collaborate, communicate and publish apps. At the same time FTP lost adoptions as fast as git gained.

Reviewer: I never heard of "lost adoptions". Benefits? (Maybe there's a better word)

```suggestion
Git has become more popular, not only for version control but also as a way developers collaborate, communicate and publish apps. At the same time, FTP lost benefits as fast as git gained.
```

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://ssl.gstatic.com/trends_nrtr/2213_RC01/embed_loader.js"></script> <script type="text/javascript"> trends.embed.renderExploreWidget("TIMESERIES", {"comparisonItem":[{"keyword":"/m/05vqwg","geo":"","time":"2010-01-01 2020-06-04"},{"keyword":"/m/0dzxs","geo":"","time":"2010-01-01 2020-06-04"}],"category":0,"property":""}, {"exploreQuery":"date=2010-01-01%202020-06-04&q=%2Fm%2F05vqwg,%2Fm%2F0dzxs","guestPath":"https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/"}); </script>

### Browser capabilities & Front-end build tools

> Browsers become really powerful, nowadays a browser is a lot more than a document viewer, it's also a JS application runtime. Also the front-end build tools and ecosystem rapidly evolving and are mostly open-source. All these tools completely changed the development workflow of the front-end developers. Building and compiling staff are becoming an essential part of the modern web development workflow.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Browsers have become really powerful. Nowadays a browser is way more than a document viewer, it's also a JS application runtime. Moreover, the front-end build tools and ecosystem rapidly evolving and are mostly open-source. All these tools completely changed the development workflow of front-end developers. Building and compiling staff are becoming an essential part of the modern web development workflow.
```

### Microservices economy emerging

> And finally, API microservices become more popular, there are specific services to anything and web developers started to rely on and combine these microservices instead of building and managing complex software systems. For small and medium-sized systems, they can deliver cost reduction, quality improvement, agility, and decreased time to market. Typically microservices are implemented by a third party company but it can be developed in house too.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
And finally, API microservices have become more popular. There are specific services to anything and web developers started to rely on and combine and integrate these (instead of building and managing complex software systems). For small and medium-sized systems, they can deliver cost reduction, quality improvement, agility, and decreased time to market. Typically microservices are implemented by a third party company but it can be developed in-house too.
```

<script type="text/javascript"></script> <script type="text/javascript"> trends.embed.renderExploreWidget("TIMESERIES", {"comparisonItem":[{"keyword":"/m/011spz0k","geo":"","time":"2010-01-01 2020-06-04"}],"category":0,"property":""}, {"exploreQuery":"date=2010-01-01%202020-06-04&q=%2Fm%2F011spz0k","guestPath":"https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/"}); </script>

## JAMStack Best Practises

> As we have seen, this new web architecture stack is possible thanks to the web developer tools evolution, static site generators, microservices economy emerge among others.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we have seen, this new web architecture stack is possible thanks to the evolution of web developer tools, static site generators, and microservices economy emerge among others.
```

> When building JAMstack websites, we can really get the most out of the stack if we stick to the following best practices.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When building JAMstack websites, we can really get the most out of the stack if we stick to the following best practices:
```

**Use CDN to serve your files**

> Because Jamstack projects don’t need to rely on server-side code, they can be distributed instead of living on a single server. Serving directly from a CDN unlocks speeds and performance that can’t be beat. The more of your app you can push to the edge, the better the user experience.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because Jamstack projects don’t need to rely on server-side code, they can be distributed instead of living on a single server. Serving directly from a CDN unlocks speeds and performance that can’t be beaten. The more of your app you can push to the edge, the better the user experience.
```

Author: `But when it comes to privacy and freedom, cash can't be beat` -->  https://www.nytimes.com/roomfordebate/2012/04/04/bringing-dollars-and-cents-into-this-century/a-shift-toward-digital-currency

**Modern Build tools**

Ideally, we should take advantage of modern build tools. By using tools like Babel, PostCSS, Webpack, Gulp/Grunt we are able to use web standards still not supported in the market browsers, we can follow good practices optimizing assets and automating repetitive and time-consuming tasks.

**Everything lives in git**

> Git is fundamental to the JAMstack because it holds all the site’s components, the entire site should be pushed to a git repository. There are publishing platforms that offers CI & CD and app distribution to CDNs services so the site is automatically pre-build and deploy whenever a git remote branch changes. This workflow embodies the modern software development life cycle practice of Continuous Integration and Deployment (CI/CD).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Git is fundamental to the JAMstack because it holds all the site’s components, the entire site should be pushed to a git repository. There are publishing platforms that offer CI & CD, and app distribution to CDNs services so the site is automatically pre-build and deploy whenever a git remote branch changes. This workflow embodies the modern software development life cycle practice of Continuous Integration and Deployment (CI/CD).
```

> Having the entire site code centralized in git reduces the contribution friction since anyone is able to clone it and execute a command (e.g. npm install) to set up dependencies and run the website locally. There is no databases to clone, no complex installs, this extremely simplifies staging and testing workflows.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Having the entire site code centralized in git reduces the contribution friction since anyone is able to clone it and execute a command (e.g. npm install) to set up dependencies and run the website locally. There are no databases to clone, no complex installations. This extremely simplifies staging and testing workflows.
```

**Automated builds**  

> Because JAMStack markup is prebuilt, content changes won’t go live until you run another build. Automating this process will save you lots of frustration. You can do this yourself with webhooks, or use a publishing platform that includes the service automatically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Because JAMStack markup is prebuilt, content changes won’t go live until you run another build. Automating this process will save you lots of frustration. You can do this yourself with webhooks, or use a publishing platform that automatically includes this service.
```

**Atomic deploys**

> Any CDN content update must be performed at the same time despite the a app size and the amount of files involved. No changes should go live until all changed files have been updated otherwise can cause inconsistent state while the update process completes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any CDN content update must be performed at the same time, despite the app size and the number of files involved. No changes should go live until all changed files have been updated otherwise the state can become inconsistent
 while the update process completes.
```

> Any CDN content update must be performed at the same time despite the a app size and the amount of files involved. No changes should go live until all changed files have been updated otherwise can cause inconsistent state while the update process completes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Any CDN content update must be performed at the same time, despite the app size and the number of files involved. No changes should go live until all changed files have been updated otherwise the state can become inconsistent
 while the update process completes.
```

**Instant cache invalidation**

> Cache Control values in each file must be property set up to avoid inconsistent outdated files after deploying a new version to the CDN.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Cache-Control values in each file must be properly set up to avoid inconsistent outdated files after deploying a new version to the CDN.
```

## JAMStack ecosystem

> At this point you should have enough information on JAMStack to define if it would be useful to your app or not. Now, I would like to share some community tools and useful microservices available to leverage in your app. An important part when creating a JAMStack site is the microservices selection which mostly depend on the app functionality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
At this point, you should have enough information on JAMStack to determine if it would be useful to your app or not. Now, I would like to share some community tools and useful microservices available to leverage in your app. An important part when creating a JAMStack site is the microservices selection which mostly depends on the app functionality.
```

[Netlify](https://www.netlify.com/) It's a publishing platform for JAMStack apps. It offers CI & CD and app distribution to CDN.

[staticgen.com](https://www.staticgen.com) lists all SSG alternatives including the frameworks to build a static site with react or vue.js web frameworks.  
[Hugo](https://gohugo.io/) and [Eleventry](https://www.11ty.dev/) seems to me the most interesting SSG. Hugo because is super fast pre-building the entire website markup and Eleventy because is easy to use and flexible in terms of template system language.

[nextjs](https://nextjs.org/) and [gatsbyjs](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) are popular static site generators for react.js.  
[nuxtjs](https://nuxtjs.org/) and [gridsome](https://gridsome.org/) allows us to generate a static site using vue.js.

> In many cases a JAMStack site needs to run  code, there are microservices that allows us to do so without provisioning or managing servers.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In many cases a JAMStack site needs to run code, there are microservices that allows us to do so without provisioning or managing servers.
```

There are also many microservices providing content management system solutions (CMS), each one with its pros and cons. [sanity.io](https://www.sanity.io/), [storyblok](https://www.storyblok.com/), [prismic.io](https://prismic.io/), [contentful](https://www.contentful.com/), [ghost](https://ghost.org/), [netlifycms](https://www.netlifycms.org/) are some of them.

In terms of DB solutions, there are also a big list of them. [faunaDB](https://fauna.com/), [firebase](https://firebase.com/), [Amazon DynamoDB](https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/), [Azure Cosmos DB](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cosmos-db/), [Amazon Aurora Serverless](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/aurora/serverless/), [Amazon Relational Database Service](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/), [Cloud SQL](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/) are some alternatives.

Services like [Auth0](https://auth0.com/), [Okta](https://www.okta.com/), and [Netlify Identity](https://docs.netlify.com/visitor-access/identity/) offer a cloud-based identity management service.

> The microservices listed above are not intended to be exhaustive in any means, it's just to give an idea of how mature is the microservices industry.  

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The microservices list above is not intended to be exhaustive by any means, it's just to give a picture of how mature the microservices industry is.  
```

## Final thoughts

> As we have seen the front-end tooling, static site generators and microservices ecosystem are mature enough and the JAMStack is a reality.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
As we have seen the front-end tooling, static site generators, and microservices ecosystem are mature enough and the JAMStack is a reality.
```

> Benefits of adopting a JAMStack architecture are clear, maybe the most interesting question is: Can JAMStack be adopted by any site?

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Benefits of adopting a JAMStack architecture are clear, maybe the most interesting question is: Can any site adopt JAMStack?
```

> Time, usage and community evolution will give us the answers but API microservices emergence and front-end development tooling will continue getting better and better. Maybe if your app needs something from a very specific niche, you may have to implement it by yourself as a microservice but you are still able to follow a JAMStack architecture.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Time, usage and community evolution will give us the answers, but API microservices emergence and front-end development tooling will continue getting better and better. Maybe if your app needs something from a very specific niche, you may have to implement it by yourself as a microservice but that doesn't impede you to follow a JAMStack architecture.
```

> Let's see what JAMStack has to us in the years to come!!

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Let's see what JAMStack has for us in the years to come!!
```

LAMP and MEAN stacks are examples of this stack.

**Modern web stack**

In contrast to the monolithic web approach, there is no single origin of content, there is no single point of failure. We can also say that the loading time from any part of the world is pretty much the same since the front-end static code is distributed all over the world through the CDN.

<img src="/images/jamstack-intro/JAMStack-diagram.jpg" />

The git centric workflow allows us to host the entire website in its own git repository, also allowing us to pre-build and deploy the front-end static code whenever something is merged into the production branch.
As the diagram shows, the app relies on several microservices to perform server-side functionalities like sending emails, performing a payment flow and so on. Microservices typically solve a specific problem and are highly composable.

> ## What caused Jamstack rapidly adoption

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## What caused Jamstack fast adoption
```

> In the last years, front-end development has turned out drastically. Modern browsers, static site generators (SSG), expansive Content Delivery Networks, and the API microservices economy caused the Jamstack’s emergence.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
In the last years, front-end development ecosystem has changed drastically. Modern browsers, static site generators (SSG), expansive Content Delivery Networks, and the API microservices economy caused the Jamstack’s emergence.
```

### Git growth

Git started to be more popular not only for version control but also it started to become the way developers collaborate, communicate and publish apps. At the same time FTP lost adoptions as fast as git gained.

<script type="text/javascript" src="https://ssl.gstatic.com/trends_nrtr/2213_RC01/embed_loader.js"></script> <script type="text/javascript"> trends.embed.renderExploreWidget("TIMESERIES", {"comparisonItem":[{"keyword":"/m/05vqwg","geo":"","time":"2010-01-01 2020-06-04"},{"keyword":"/m/0dzxs","geo":"","time":"2010-01-01 2020-06-04"}],"category":0,"property":""}, {"exploreQuery":"date=2010-01-01%202020-06-04&q=%2Fm%2F05vqwg,%2Fm%2F0dzxs","guestPath":"https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/"}); </script>

### Browser capabilities & Front-end build tools

> Browsers have become really powerful. Nowadays a browser is way more than a document viewer, it's also a JS application runtime. Moreover, the front-end build tools and ecosystem rapidly evolving and are mostly open-source. All these tools completely changed the development workflow of front-end developers. Building and compiling staff are becoming an essential part of the modern web development workflow.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Browsers have become really powerful. Nowadays a browser is way more than a document viewer, it's also a JS application runtime. Moreover, the front-end build ecosystem has evolved rapidly based on open-source tools primarily. All these tools completely changed the front-end developers' workflow. Building and compiling stuff is becoming an essential part of the modern web development workflow.
```

### Microservices economy emerging

> And finally, API microservices have become more popular. There are specific services to anything and web developers started to rely on and combine and integrate these (instead of building and managing complex software systems). For small and medium-sized systems, they can deliver cost reduction, quality improvement, agility, and decreased time to market. Typically microservices are implemented by a third party company but it can be developed in-house too.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
And finally, API microservices have become really popular. There are specialized 3rd party services to manage the most common functionality we find in a web app. Web developers started to rely on, combine, and integrate these (instead of building and managing complex software systems). For small and medium-sized systems, they can deliver cost reduction, quality improvement, agility, and decreased time to market. Typically microservices are implemented by a third party company but it can be developed in-house too.
```

<script type="text/javascript"></script> <script type="text/javascript"> trends.embed.renderExploreWidget("TIMESERIES", {"comparisonItem":[{"keyword":"/m/011spz0k","geo":"","time":"2010-01-01 2020-06-04"}],"category":0,"property":""}, {"exploreQuery":"date=2010-01-01%202020-06-04&q=%2Fm%2F011spz0k","guestPath":"https://trends.google.com:443/trends/embed/"}); </script>

> ## Jamstack Best Practises

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Jamstack Best Practices
```

> As we have seen, this new web architecture stack is possible thanks to the evolution of web developer tools, static site generators, and microservices economy emerge among others.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As we have seen, this new web architecture stack is possible thanks to the evolution of web developer tools, static site generators, and an emerging microservices economy among others.
```

When building Jamstack websites, we can really get the most out of the stack if we stick to the following best practices:

**Use CDN to serve your files**

> Because Jamstack projects don’t need to rely on server-side code, they can be distributed instead of living on a single server. Serving directly from a CDN unlocks speeds and performance that can’t be beat. The more of your app you can push to the edge, the better the user experience.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Because Jamstack projects don’t need to rely on server-side code, they can be distributed instead of living on a single server. Serving directly from a CDN unlocks speed and performance improvements that are hard to match. The more of your app you can push to the edge, the better the user experience.
```

**Modern Build tools**

> Ideally, we should take advantage of modern build tools. By using tools like Babel, PostCSS, Webpack, Gulp/Grunt we are able to use web standards still not supported in the market browsers, we can follow good practices optimizing assets and automating repetitive and time-consuming tasks.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Ideally, we can also take advantage of modern build tools. By using tools like Babel, PostCSS, Webpack, Gulp/Grunt we are able to use web standards not currently supported in the market-leading browsers. We can also adopt good practices for asset optimization with minimal effort, and automate repetitive and time-consuming tasks.
```

**Everything lives in git**

> Git is fundamental to the Jamstack because it holds all the site’s components, the entire site should be pushed to a git repository. There are publishing platforms that offer CI & CD, and app distribution to CDNs services so the site is automatically pre-build and deploy whenever a git remote branch changes. This workflow embodies the modern software development life cycle practice of Continuous Integration and Deployment (CI/CD).

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
Git is fundamental to the Jamstack because it holds all the site’s components, the entire site should be pushed to a git repository. There are publishing platforms that offer CI & CD, and app distribution to CDN services so the site is automatically pre-build and deploy whenever a git remote branch changes. This workflow embodies the modern software development life cycle practice of Continuous Integration and Deployment (CI/CD).
```

Having the entire site code centralized in git reduces the contribution friction since anyone is able to clone it and execute a command (e.g. npm install) to set up dependencies and run the website locally. There are no databases to clone, no complex installations. This extremely simplifies staging and testing workflows.

**Automated builds**  

Because Jamstack markup is prebuilt, content changes won’t go live until you run another build. Automating this process will save you lots of frustration. You can do this yourself with webhooks, or use a publishing platform that automatically includes this service.

**Atomic deploys**

Any CDN content update must be performed at the same time, despite the app size and the number of files involved. No changes should go live until all changed files have been updated otherwise the state can become inconsistent
 while the update process completes.

**Instant cache invalidation**

Cache-Control values in each file must be properly set up to avoid inconsistent outdated files after deploying a new version to the CDN.

> ## Jamstack ecosystem

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
## Jamstack ecosystem resources
```

[nextjs](https://nextjs.org/) and [gatsbyjs](https://www.gatsbyjs.org/) are popular static site generators for react.js.  
[nuxtjs](https://nuxtjs.org/) and [gridsome](https://gridsome.org/) allows us to generate a static site using vue.js.

In many cases a Jamstack site needs to run code, there are microservices that allows us to do so without provisioning or managing servers.
[AWS Lambda](https://aws.amazon.com/lambda/) is a very popular one. Netlify has Functions which allows to deploy serverless AWS Lambda functions on Netlify just by adding a file to your Git repository.
[Google serverless computing solutions](https://cloud.google.com/serverless-options) and [Microsoft serverless computing solutions](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/overview/serverless-computing/) are others serverless compute services out there.

There are also many microservices providing content management system solutions (CMS), each one with its pros and cons. [sanity.io](https://www.sanity.io/), [storyblok](https://www.storyblok.com/), [prismic.io](https://prismic.io/), [contentful](https://www.contentful.com/), [ghost](https://ghost.org/), [netlifycms](https://www.netlifycms.org/) are some of them.

> In terms of DB solutions, there are also a big list of them. [faunaDB](https://fauna.com/), [firebase](https://firebase.com/), [Amazon DynamoDB](https://aws.amazon.com/dynamodb/), [Azure Cosmos DB](https://azure.microsoft.com/en-us/services/cosmos-db/), [Amazon Aurora Serverless](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/aurora/serverless/), [Amazon Relational Database Service](https://aws.amazon.com/rds/), [Cloud SQL](https://cloud.google.com/sql/docs/) are some alternatives.

Reviewer 2: MENCIONAR QUE FAUNA ES UN CLIENTE DE XMARLTABS!!

Services like [Auth0](https://auth0.com/), [Okta](https://www.okta.com/), and [Netlify Identity](https://docs.netlify.com/visitor-access/identity/) offer a cloud-based identity management service.

The microservices list above is not intended to be exhaustive by any means, it's just to give a picture of how mature the microservices industry is.  

## Final thoughts

> As we have seen the front-end tooling, static site generators, and microservices ecosystem are mature enough and the Jamstack is a reality.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
We have seen that the front-end tooling, static site generators, and microservices ecosystem are mature enough and Jamstack is a reality.
```

Benefits of adopting a Jamstack architecture are clear, maybe the most interesting question is: Can any site adopt Jamstack?
Time, usage and community evolution will give us the answers, but API microservices emergence and front-end development tooling will continue getting better and better. Maybe if your app needs something from a very specific niche, you may have to implement it by yourself as a microservice but that doesn't impede you to follow a Jamstack architecture.

> Let's see what Jamstack has for us in the years to come!!

Reviewer 2: me parece una conclusion medio floja.. que quisiste decir?
